hey this is pressure Walker a cat is
hiding in one of five boxes that are
lined up in a row the boxes are numbered
one to five each night the cat hides in
an adjacent box exactly one number away
each morning you can open a single box
to try to find the cat can you win this
game of hide-and-seek what is your
strategy for finding the cat here's a
bonus problem what if there are n boxes
in a row can you figure it out give this
problem a try and when you're ready keep
watching the video for the solution I'm
first going to go over some strategies
which won't work the first thing you
should not do is search randomly and
hope to find the cat let's imagine on
the first day you search box three
unknown to you the cat is in box two now
let's imagine the next day you search
box two and unknown to you the cat moves
to box three if you search half as early
you might keep missing and never find
the cat so you should not just search
randomly another thing you should not do
is you should not just simply keep
opening the same box let's imagine the
first day you check box two unknown to
you the cat is in box four now imagine
you keep checking box two every single
day well it could be that the cat is
looping between boxes three and four so
you will never check a box where the cat
actually is so if you keep checking the
same box you might also never find the
cat you might wonder is it possible that
you will ever find the cat the answer is
yes we can imagine a simpler case of
three boxes the cat could start in any
of the three boxes now let's suppose you
check box two because it's in the middle
if you do find the cat you win otherwise
you know the cat must have been in an
odd numbered box one or three well at
night you know that the cat is going to
move one box so from either case the cat
is going to have to move to box 2 on the
next day you can therefore check box -
and you will find a cat so this simple
case suggests a pattern since the cat
alternates between even and odd numbered
boxes we should split up the cases
between the cat being in an even and an
odd numbered box so let's return to the
five boxes case the cat could start in
any of the five boxes but let's consider
that the cat is in an even numbered box
that would be box two or box for on the
first day we can check one of the boxes
let's check box - if you do find the cat
you win otherwise that means the cat
must have been in box for now that cat
will move one box to either box 3 or box
5 so the next day you check box 3 if you
do find the cat you win otherwise you
know the cat must have been in box 5 and
now the cat is going to move one box and
it's going to end up in box 4 so on the
third day you can check box for and you
are going to find the cat for sure so
this rinji works that the cat started in
an even-numbered box 2 or 4 but what if
the cat started in an odd numbered box
one three or five well let's see what
happens after we check for three days so
we have the cat starting in an odd
numbered box the cat moves one box at
nut so it's going to be in two or four
the next day from there it's going to
move one box and then it's going to move
one more box
so that means on the start of the fourth
day the cat is going to be in box two or
four in other words on the fourth day
the cat will be in an even numbered box
so now we need to catch a cat that's in
an even numbered bucks so our problem
reduces the case one that the cat is in
an even numbered box and now the problem
has reduced to one that we've already
solved to catch the cat we can now check
box 2 then box 3 and then box 4 so the
whole trick is that we needed to guess
an even numbered box when the cat is in
an even numbered box
this makes the difference between our
guests and the cats box an even number
every single day so we never miss the
cat by just one box alternately we could
have guessed an odd number box when the
cat is in in an odd numbered box this
also makes a difference between our
guests and the cat box an even number
every single day remember this when we
go to the four box case which will be
much later in the video so to summarize
we can solve this problem by first
checking box
- then box 3 and then box for this will
catch a cat that started in an even
numbered box on day one we then can
repeat this because this will catch a
cat that started in an odd numbered box
which will then be an even numbered box
by day four now there are a couple
things I want to mention first there are
equivalent solutions for an odd number
boxes
so the strategy 234 will catch a cat
that starts in an even box on day 1 but
there's another way you could have
actually done it from the other end you
could have done box 4 then 3 then 2 this
will also catch a cat that started in an
even numbered box on day 1 one of the
ways that you can understand this is
that you could imagine the numbers being
in the exact opposite order
two-three-four is like catching a cat
with the numbering going from left to
right and 4 3 2 is like catching the
same cat if the numbering goes from
right to left so they're equivalent by
the symmetry of the boxes in the line so
because there are equivalent solutions
for catching a cat in an even numbered
box they're actually four different ways
that we could catch this cat we could
repeat two three four we could also do
two three four then four three two we
could do four three two then two three
four
or we could repeat four three two so the
solution I'm going to illustrate in the
next version is two three four and then
four three two
so we search one way and then we reverse
the order this will also be useful when
we consider an even number of boxes so
first let me illustrate this in a grid
we have five boxes that we're going to
check over several days so in this grid
I'm going to mark a gray rectangle for
possible boxes that the cat could be in
on the first day the cats be in any of
the five boxes I'm then going to use a
blue rectangle to mean the Box you check
on that day so the first day you check
box 2
I will then mark a black rectangle to
mean boxes the cat cannot possibly be
we're deducing this by the process of
elimination so on the first day you
check box 2
if you find the cat you win if not that
means the next day you know the cat
cannot be in box 1 because if the cat
was not in box 2 on the first day
there's no way you could have moved to
box 1 it can only get to box 1 from box
two the night before so we know that on
the second day the cat cannot be in the
first box but it could be in any of the
other boxes so on the next day we check
box 3 if we find the cat we win
otherwise we know that the cat was not
in boxes 1 or 3 so that would mean the
next day it could not be in box 2 it
could be in any of the other boxes we
then check box for this we'll catch a
cat that started in an even numbered box
on the first day if we did not catch the
cat by now we know that on the third day
the cat is not in box 2 and it's not in
box for so it could not be in an odd
numbered box the next day we can
eliminate boxes 1 3 & 5 this is also
currently saying that the cat has to be
in an even numbered box on the fourth
day so now we check one of these boxes
we check box for if we find the cat we
win otherwise since the cat was not in
box 4 that means it could not be in any
of the even-numbered boxes because it's
not in any of the odd-numbered boxes and
it can't be in box 5 because the only
way I could have gone to box 5 is to a
bin in box for on the day before so we
now only have two possible places that
the cat could be could be in box one or
box three we now check box three if we
find the cat we win otherwise we know
it's not in any box except for box one
so the cats going to have to move one
box and on the final day there's only
one possibility it has to be in box two
so this is the only possible place the
cat could be so we check that box and
we're going to win for sure so now let's
consider a different case where the
total number of boxes is an even number
let's consider that there are four boxes
and the cat could be in any of the four
boxes well split up the search into two
different cases let's suppose the cat
starts in an even numbered box that
would be box two or box for we might as
well search one of these boxes so we'll
get started by searching box 2 if the
cat is there we win otherwise we would
deduce the cat must have been in box for
the cat is going to move one box and
that means it's going to have to move to
box three therefore on the next day we
can search box three and we're going to
win
so we're going to catch the cat using
the strategy if the cat started in an
even numbered box but what if the cat
started in an odd numbered box this case
is going to be slightly different the
reason is that the cat is still going to
be in an odd numbered box on the third
day let's see why
so pulls on the first day the cat
started in an odd numbered box overnight
it moves one box and then it's going to
move one more box so on the third day
the cat is still in an odd numbered box
so we're going to have to catch a cat
that is in in odd numbered bucks to do
that we might as well search one of the
boxes so in this case we're going to
search box three we're going to do our
search in Reverse we did two three now
we're going to do three two so we start
up by searching box three if the cat is
there we win otherwise we can deduce the
cat must have been in box one so
overnight the cat is going to move one
box it's going to have to move two box -
so we're then going to search box two
and we're going to catch the cat for
sure so notice that this search was
going to be 2/3 and then the reverse
search of three - so this brings us to
the general way of how you can catch a
cat in any number of boxes where n is
even or odd in the first search you
check the boxes going from 2 to n minus
1 this will catch a cat that started in
an even numbered box on the first day in
the next search you do the boxes in
exactly the reverse order this will
catch a cat that started in an odd
numbered box on the first day for
completeness you can also reverse steps
one and two and if n is odd you can also
win by doing two searches of step one or
two searches of step two so this
describes some of the ways that you can
catch the cat where n is either even or
odd and you will
the cat for sure did you figure it out
thanks for watching this video please
subscribe to my channel I make videos on
mass and game theory you can catch me on
my blog mind your decisions which you
can follow on Facebook Google+ and
patreon you can catch me on social media
at pressure Walker and if you like this
video please check out my books there
are links in the video description